Fast online and index-based algorithms for approximate search of RNA
sequence-structure patterns.

BACKGROUND: It is well known that the search for homologous RNAs is more
effective if both sequence and structure information is incorporated into the
search. However, current tools for searching with RNA sequence-structure patterns
cannot fully handle mutations occurring on both these levels or are simply not
fast enough for searching large sequence databases because of the high
computational costs of the underlying sequence-structure alignment problem.
RESULTS: We present new fast index-based and online algorithms for approximate
matching of RNA sequence-structure patterns supporting a full set of edit
operations on single bases and base pairs. Our methods efficiently compute
semi-global alignments of structural RNA patterns and substrings of the target
sequence whose costs satisfy a user-defined sequence-structure edit distance
threshold. For this purpose, we introduce a new computing scheme to optimally
reuse the entries of the required dynamic programming matrices for all substrings
and combine it with a technique for avoiding the alignment computation of
non-matching substrings. Our new index-based methods exploit suffix arrays
preprocessed from the target database and achieve running times that are
sublinear in the size of the searched sequences. To support the description of
RNA molecules that fold into complex secondary structures with multiple ordered
sequence-structure patterns, we use fast algorithms for the local or global
chaining of approximate sequence-structure pattern matches. The chaining step
removes spurious matches from the set of intermediate results, in particular of
patterns with little specificity. In benchmark experiments on the Rfam database, 
our improved online algorithm is faster than the best previous method by up to
factor 45. Our best new index-based algorithm achieves a speedup of factor 560.
CONCLUSIONS: The presented methods achieve considerable speedups compared to the 
best previous method. This, together with the expected sublinear running time of 
the presented index-based algorithms, allows for the first time approximate
matching of RNA sequence-structure patterns in large sequence databases. Beyond
the algorithmic contributions, we provide with RaligNAtor a robust and well
documented open-source software package implementing the algorithms presented in 
this manuscript. The RaligNAtor software is available at
http://www.zbh.uni-hamburg.de/ralignator.
