SeqTools: visual tools for manual analysis of sequence alignments.

BACKGROUND: Manual annotation is essential to create high-quality reference
alignments and annotation. Annotators need to be able to view sequence alignments
in detail. The SeqTools package provides three tools for viewing different types 
of sequence alignment: Blixem is a many-to-one browser of pairwise alignments,
displaying multiple match sequences aligned against a single reference sequence; 
Dotter provides a graphical dot-plot view of a single pairwise alignment; and
Belvu is a multiple sequence alignment viewer, editor, and phylogenetic tool.
These tools were originally part of the AceDB genome database system but have
been completely rewritten to make them generally available as a standalone
package of greatly improved function.
FINDINGS: Blixem is used by annotators to give a detailed view of the evidence
for particular gene models. Blixem displays the gene model positions and the
match sequences aligned against the genomic reference sequence. Annotators use
this for many reasons, including to check the quality of an alignment, to find
missing/misaligned sequence and to identify splice sites and polyA sites and
signals. Dotter is used to give a dot-plot representation of a particular
pairwise alignment. This is used to identify sequence that is not represented (or
is misrepresented) and to quickly compare annotated gene models with
transcriptional and protein evidence that putatively supports them. Belvu is used
to analyse conservation patterns in multiple sequence alignments and to perform a
combination of manual and automatic processing of the alignment. High-quality
reference alignments are essential if they are to be used as a starting point for
further automatic alignment generation.
CONCLUSIONS: While there are many different alignment tools available, the
SeqTools package provides unique functionality that annotators have found to be
essential for analysing sequence alignments as part of the manual annotation
process.